What is an API?
API stands for Application Programming Interface. The application can be any software that 
performs a specific task and the interface is a point where two applications communicate.

One application acts as a client and the other acts as a server. A client asks for some 
resource, say for example a photo, and the server sends that photo to the client.

The client here can be your mobile phone, desktop or laptop computer, or any device you use
 to surf the internet. And the server is a bigger computer that stores the data you 
 want (a photo in our case).

 Suppose I want a nature photograph to upload to my travel blog. I might go onto the 
 Unsplash website, type "nature: in the search bar, and it would return a large number 
 of nature photographs.

That's an API working behind the scenes to make the conversation between Unsplash and me 
happen.

How Do APIs Work?
Computers follow a protocol to communicate with each other. A protocol is nothing but a set 
of rules that computers follow to communicate. Any computer that doesn't follow the protocol
 breaks the communication thread.

You might have used Bluetooth to share data back in the day. Bluetooth is nothing but a 
protocol for mobile devices to communicate with each other at a shorter distance.

When you ask your friend to send you photos of their last trip, your device acts as a 
client, and your friend's device (the one that sends photos) is the server.

This is just an example of a protocol. We have a large number of protocols in the world of 
computer science – one for almost anything.

On the web, we use the HTTP protocol (which stands for Hyper Text Transfer Protocol). APIs 
available on the web use the HTTP protocol for a number of reasons - it's easy to use and 
it's popular, for example.

Communications that take place over the HTTP protocol are also known as the request-response
 cycle because this is exactly how the protocol works. The client sends a request to the 
 server and the server responds to the client regarding that request.

Unlike humans, computers have to be rigid to communicate with each other or they break the 
communication. For this reason, a client (requesting computer/ device) needs a set of 
information to send with the request so the server responds accordingly. This information 
includes:

URL – a web address where you want to make a request
Method – whether you want data already stored somewhere or want to save new data in a 
database
Header – all the relevant information about your request including in what format the 
client device expects to receive the data
Body – the body contains the actual request data



Let's go deep on HTTP methods — these are the "verbs" that tell the server what action you
 want to take. Here's each one, explained simply with real examples.
The Core Idea
Every HTTP request has two parts that matter here:

The URL → what thing you're working with (/users/5)
The method → what you want to do to that thing

Same URL, different method, different result.
GET — "Show me"
Fetches data. Never changes anything on the server.
GET /users/5
→ Returns user #5's data. You can call this 1000 times, nothing on the server changes.
Real-world feel: Like looking through a shop window. Looking doesn't change what's inside.
POST — "Create a new one"
Creates something new. Every time you call it, a new thing gets made.
POST /users
Body: { "name": "Ahmed", "email": "ahmed@mail.com" }
→ Creates a new user. Call it twice with the same data → you get two different users
 with two different IDs.
Real-world feel: Like submitting a form to open a new bank account — each submission
 opens a new account, even with the same details.
PUT — "Replace this entirely"
Replaces the whole resource with what you send. If it doesn't exist, some APIs create 
it; if it exists, it's fully overwritten.
PUT /users/5
Body: { "name": "Ahmed", "email": "ahmed@mail.com" }
→ User 5 is now exactly this data. If user 5 previously had a "phone" field and you don't 
include it in your PUT body, that phone field gets wiped out — because PUT replaces 
everything.
Call it 5 times with the same body → same result every time. This is called idempotent.
PATCH — "Update just this part"
Updates only the fields you send, leaving everything else untouched.
PATCH /users/5
Body: { "email": "newemail@mail.com" }
→ Only the email changes. Name, phone, everything else stays as it was.
PUT vs PATCH — the classic confusion:
PUTPATCHSendsEntire resourceOnly the changed fieldsEffectFull replacementPartial 
updateAnalogyRepainting the whole carTouching up one scratch
DELETE — "Remove this"
Deletes the resource.
DELETE /users/5
→ User 5 is gone. Call it again → user 5 is still gone (no error, no double-delete issue).
 That's also idempotent — the end state is the same no matter how many times you call it.
Quick Summary Table
MethodActionChanges data?Idempotent? (safe to repeat)GETReadNoYesPOSTCreateYesNo — repeats 
create duplicatesPUTReplaceYesYesPATCHPartial updateYesNot guaranteedDELETERemoveYesYes
Why "idempotent" matters (practical reason)
Imagine your internet glitches after you hit "submit." Your app auto-retries the request.

If it was a POST (create) → you might now have 2 duplicate orders. Bad.
If it was a PUT or DELETE → retrying is safe, the end result is identical either way.

This is exactly why REST design pushes you to pick the right method — it's not just style,
 it protects against real bugs.


HTTP status codes
There is a huge list of HTTP status codes, but let's look at a few of the most common:

200 OK: this indicates that the request was successfully fulfilled by the server
201 CREATED: the data entry that you requested to create was created
404 NOT FOUND: this indicates that the resource you requested wasn't found by the server
500 INTERNAL SERVER ERROR: this means that an error occured at the server's end and it 
    couldn't fulfill your request
There is no need to memorize these status codes, as the list is huge and you will 
    subconsciously learn them as you encounter them in your development journey.

Still, there is a range of status codes that indicates a generic response, as you can see 
    here:

100s: Informational responses, indicating the request's progress
200s: Success, indicating the request's success
300s: Redirection, indicating the request had to redirect somewhere else
400s: Client errors, indicating errors that occurred on the client side
500s: Server errors, when the server fails to respond to a valid client request


Types of APIs
API types are mainly categorised by their accessibility and usage. There are four types of 
    APIs, namely:
Open (Public) APIs
Partner APIs
Internal (Private) APIs
Composite APIs

Open APIs
Open APIs are APIs made available to the general public. This encourages developers, 
organisations, and other people to use them to develop applications, integrate them into 
their services, and improve them. Open APIs provide standardised access to data or services 
over the Internet.

Some very useful Open APIs include:

TradeWatch – Real-time financial market data

SerpAPI’s Search API – Real-time Google SERP API

TwitterApi.io – Access real-time and historical data

Instagram Post Generator – Generate posts with templates from popular IG pages

Partner APIs
Partner APIs are shared with specific business partners and often require authentication 
and agreements. They perform essential functions for businesses and applications.

For example, a payment API like Paystack directly communicates with service providers and
 banking platforms to process payments for products and services.

Internal APIs
Internal APIs are used for internal communication within an organisation. They enable 
integration and streamline internal processes. Internal teams use the API to access and 
share data between their applications. The API is not exposed to the public, ensuring that
 sensitive business logic remains secure.

An example is a company’s internal API that connects its HR, payroll, and project 
management systems.

Composite APIs
Composite APIs combine multiple API calls into a single request. They are instrumental 
in microservices architectures, where a single operation may require data from several 
services. A single API call triggers requests to multiple underlying APIs, and the 
composite API then combines the responses and returns a unified result.

For example, an e-commerce platform might use a composite API to fetch product details,
 pricing, and inventory information in one go, reducing latency and simplifying the 
 integration process.



Types of API Architecture
APIs are structured differently depending on use case, scalability, security, and 
accessibility. There are multiple ways to structure an API, but we will only focus on 
the most prevalent architectural styles used in Web development. They include:

REST

SOAP

GraphQL

gRPC