Introduction to Express
Express.js is a minimal and flexible Node.js web application framework that simplifies 
building server-side applications and APIs.

Middleware-based: Uses middleware to handle requests, responses, and common features.
Routing system: Structure—developers can design apps as they want.
Integration: Works well with databases (MongoDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL) and front-end frameworks.
Scalable: Suitable for small apps to large-scale enterprise APIs.

Usage of Express.js
Express.js is a popular web framework for Node.js that simplifies server-side development. It is widely used to build web applications, APIs, and scalable server-side solutions.

Web Applications: Build dynamic sites and SPAs efficiently.
RESTful APIs: Create APIs for CRUD operations and data delivery.
Middleware Apps: Add logging, authentication, and validation.
Microservices: Lightweight and modular for scalable services.
Server-Side Rendering: Supports EJS, Pug, Handlebars.
Proxy/Gateway: Routes and manages HTTP traffic.
Rapid Prototyping: Quickly develop and test server logic.


Why use Express?
Before we start with mechanism of using Express as the backend framework, let us first
 explore why we should consider it using or the reasons of its popularity.

Express lets you build single page, multi-page, and hybrid web and mobile applications. 
Other common backend use is to provide an API for a client (whether web or mobile).
It comes with a default template engine, Jade which helps to facilitate the flow of data 
into a website structure and does support other template engines.
It supports MVC (Model-View-Controller), a very common architecture to design web 
applications.
It is cross-platform and is not limited to any particular operating system.
It leverages upon Node.js single threaded and asynchronous model.
Whenever we create a project using npm, our project must have a package.json file.


Creating package.json
A JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) file is contains every information about any Express 
project. The number of modules installed, the name of the project, the version, and other 
meta information. To add Express as a module in our project, first we need to create a
 project directory and then create a package.json file.

mkdir express-app-example
cd express-app-example
npm init --yes
This will generate a package.json file in the root of the project directory. To install any module from npm we need to have package.json file exist in that directory.

{
  "name": "express-web-app",
  "version": "0.1.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "keywords": [],
  "license": "MIT"
}
Installing Express
Now we have package.json file, we can install Express by running the command:

npm install --save express
We can confirm that Express has correctly installed by two ways. First, there will be new 
section in package.json file named dependencies under which our Express exists:

{
  "name": "express-web-app",
  "version": "0.1.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "keywords": [],
  "license": "MIT",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "4.16.0"
  }
}
Second way is that a new folder called node_modules suddenly appeared in the root of our
 project directory. This folder stores the packages we install locally in our project.


 Anatomy of an Express Application
A typical structure of an Express server file will most likely contain the following parts:

Dependencies

Importing the dependencies such as the express itself. These dependencies are installed 
using npm like we did in the previous example.

Instantiations

These are the statements to create an object. To use express, we have to instantiate the 
app variable from it.

Configurations

These statements are the custom application based settings that are defined after the 
instantiations or defined in a separate file (more on this when discuss the project 
structure) and required in our main server file.

Middleware

These functions determine the flow of request-response cycle. They are executred after every incoming request. We can also define custom middleware functions. We have section on them below.

Routes

They are the endpoints defined in our server that helps to perform operations for a particular client request.

Bootstrapping Server

The last that gets executed in an Express server is the app.listen() function which starts our server.

We will now start disussing sections that we haven’t previously discussed about.



MVC Design Pattern
Last Updated : 18 May, 2026
The MVC (Model–View–Controller) design pattern divides an application into three separate components: Model, View, and Controller. This separation of concerns improves code organization, maintainability, and scalability. Each component handles a specific responsibility, making the application easier to modify and extend.

Model: Manages application data and business logic.
View: Handles the user interface and presentation of data.
Controller: Processes user input and coordinates between Model and View.
Components
The MVC architecture consists of three main components that work together to separate application logic, data handling, and user interaction.

1. Model
The Model component in the MVC (Model-View-Controller) design pattern demonstrates the data and business logic of an application. It is responsible for managing the application's data, processing business rules, and responding to requests for information from other components, such as the View and the Controller.

2. View
Displays the data from the Model to the user and sends user inputs to the Controller. It is passive and does not directly interact with the Model. Instead, it receives data from the Model and sends user inputs to the Controller for processing.

3. Controller
Controller acts as an intermediary between the Model and the View. It handles user input and updates the Model accordingly and updates the View to reflect changes in the Model. It contains application logic, such as input validation and data transformation.

Real-Life Software Example
An e-commerce website follows the MVC pattern to separate data handling, user interface, and request processing.

Model: Manages product data, user accounts, and order information from the database.
View: Displays product pages, shopping carts, and order details to users.
Controller: Handles user requests, processes actions like login or checkout, and updates the Model and View accordingly.
Uses
MVC is used to organize an application by separating responsibilities, making development and maintenance easier.

Allows independent development and modification of Model, View, and Controller.
Improves maintainability by isolating changes to specific components.
Simplifies testing by separating business logic from the user interface.
Supports scalability and smoother addition of new features.
Communication between the Components
This below communication flow ensures that each component is responsible for a specific aspect of the application's functionality, leading to a more maintainable and scalable architecture

User Interaction with View: The user interacts with the View, such as clicking a button or entering text into a form.
View Receives User Input: The View receives the user input and forwards it to the Controller.
Controller Processes User Input: The Controller receives the user input from the View. It interprets the input, performs any necessary operations (such as updating the Model), and decides how to respond.
Controller Updates Model: The Controller updates the Model based on the user input or application logic.
Model Notifies View of Changes: If the Model changes, it notifies the View.
View Requests Data from Model: The View requests data from the Model to update its display.
Controller Updates View: The Controller updates the View based on the changes in the Model or in response to user input.
View Renders Updated UI: The View renders the updated UI based on the changes made by the Controller.
